doc: Transaction name clustering (#889)
getsentry/develop: src/docs/transaction-clustering/index.mdx

---

> title: Sanitizing URL Transactions # TODO: decide on name.

Author: This might be a good time to pick a definitive name for this feature. Plenty of choices:

* Transaction (name) Normalization
* Sanitizing Transaction Names
* Clustering (URL) Transaction (Names)
* Transaction Grouping

Please leave a vote :)

Author: Decided to go for "Clustering URL Transactions" after talking to @jan-auer.

(the [`event.transaction`](/sdk/event-payloads/#optional-attributes) field).
This works well as long as the cardinality of distinct transaction names that the SDK sends is low, for example
by using the [route of a web framework](https://docs.sentry.io/platforms/javascript/guides/react/configuration/integrations/react-router/) as transaction name.

However, in some cases the SDK does not have enough information to pick a meaningful group
like the name of a view or a route of a web transaction,
and it has to fall back to the raw URL (or rather,
[its path component](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier#Syntax)).

First and foremost, this makes it harder for the user to extract insights from [Performance
metrics](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/metrics/), because instead of presenting averages, percentiles and distributions of groups of transactions that logically
belong together, we end up with a bunch of one-off transaction groups.

```
/account/settings/nf215j634705291cvcm725757m53451365023487cv562n905n2634590xn26340/
/issues/1234567890
/saml/acs/my-organization/

> /settings/e1fb593b4c3a4d388e2f6ea8c92c3abc/

Author: These are from our javascript project, but I replaced the actual IDs by random keyboard entries.

Reviewer: Although I think the examples are good, I think cooking one or two examples that are in line with the rest of the document is more helpful to understand what this is really about. Since we already have diagrams for `/user/alice` and `/blog`, I think it's a good chance to add `/blog/1234567dksajhfl/comments` (or similar) and have all cases covered.

Author: Good call, I aligned all the examples.

```

Secondly, ingesting a high number of one-off transaction names puts a cost on our infrastructure,
because with [metrics](https://getsentry.github.io/relay/relay_metrics/index.html), the cost of storage is determined by _cardinality_ (the number of distinct groups), not volume (the number of events ingested).

### << unparameterized >>

An intermediate solution to the cost problem was to drop the transaction tag from Performance metrics
when the transaction name is a raw URL. This effectively groups _all_ URL transactions into one big group,
which also creates a bad user experience:

![Project with only unparameterized transactions](./unparameterized.png)

## The Solution

### Pattern-based Identifier Scrubbing

In a first step, Relay strips common identifiers such as UUIDs, integer IDs and hashes
from URL transactions ([code](https://github.com/getsentry/relay/blob/e543401086c556b769b67ccb96fbfaca411696c8/relay-general/src/store/transactions/processor.rs#L273-L277)).

> For example,

Reviewer: To be consistent with the `:` above, although I'm not sure what option is grammatically correct.
```suggestion
For example:
```

```python
"/hash/4c79f60c11214eb38604f4ae0781bfb2/diff"
# becomes
"/hash/*/diff"
```

### Automatic Transaction Clustering

Some identifiers cannot be detected by looking at a single transaction. For example,
free-form user names cannot be dinstinghuished from low-cardinality parts of a URL.

To detect high-cardinality segments in the URL, we accumulate a set of unique URL transaction names for each project, split them by `"/"`, and build a tree from its path segments (similar to a [trie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trie) data structure):

![tree of URL path segments](./tree.png)

If the number of children of a node surpass a threshold (currently set to 200), we treat the path segment as high-cardinality, and fold its children into a single node:

![tree with merged segments](./merged.png)

> For every merged segment, we create a glob-like replacement rule that can be used to scrub identifiers from new transactions. In the example above, the rule would be

Reviewer: Same as with the `:` above.
```suggestion
For every merged segment, we create a glob-like replacement rule that can be used to scrub identifiers from new transactions. In the example above, the rule would be:
```

```
/user/*/**
```

> If a transaction name matches this glob, the segment matching `*` gets replaced, thereby erasing the identifier.

Reviewer: I'd use "corresponding" (or another word) over "matching", since technically every segment "matches" `*`.
```suggestion
If a transaction name matches this glob, the segment corresponding to `*` get replaced, thereby erasing the identifier.
```

Source code:

> - [clusterer (Sentry)](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/blob/9af20330c84b971882be9837d4e43e148af5a126/src/sentry/ingest/transaction_clusterer/tree.py)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Transaction clusterer (Sentry)](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/blob/9af20330c84b971882be9837d4e43e148af5a126/src/sentry/ingest/transaction_clusterer/tree.py).
```

> - [application of replacement rules (Relay)](https://github.com/getsentry/relay/blob/e543401086c556b769b67ccb96fbfaca411696c8/relay-general/src/store/transactions/processor.rs#L37-L46)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Application of replacement rules (Relay)](https://github.com/getsentry/relay/blob/e543401086c556b769b67ccb96fbfaca411696c8/relay-general/src/store/transactions/processor.rs#L37-L46).
```

## Architecture

![Architecture](./transaction-clustering-arch.png)

> 1. In post processing, we add incoming transaction names of type `url` to a redis set (one set per project).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In post processing, we add incoming transaction names of type `url` to a project-specific set in redis.
```

>    Every set is capped at 2000 entries. When the set is full, a random item is evicted.

Reviewer: Same suggestion as above wrt numbers:
```suggestion
   Every set is capped with a maximum capacity. When the set is full, a random item is evicted.
```

   404 transactions are excluded from this data collection step as they can potentially contain any URL.
1. Every hour, a Celery task is spawned for every redis set, which
   1. builds the tree and derives rules from merged nodes.
   1. writes the rules into project options.
1. The derived rules are written into the project config submitted to Relay.
1. For every incoming transaction of type URL, Relay applies matching rules to scrub identifiers.

### Rule TTL

> In order to prune unused rules, we keep a copy of discovered rules in redis, and in post processing
> bump a `last_used` field on a rule if it was applied to the current event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to prune unused rules, we keep a copy of discovered rules in Redis and in post-processing
bump a `last_used` field on rules that normalized a transaction name.
```

The information which rule was applied is provided by Relay through the `_meta` field.

## Known Issues

### Accidental erasure of non-identifiers

Every level of the tree of URL path segments could contain a mixture of identifiers and static pages, for example

```

/user/alice
/user/bob
/user/settings <-
/user/carol
...

```

our current approach would replace `/user/settings` with `/user/*` because it detects high cardinality on the second level, even though `/settings` is a static route.

**Possible Solution using Weights**:

This could be fixed by assigning a weight to each node, proportional to the number of transactions that have this segment.
Nodes with large weights would then be encoded into the replacement rules as exceptions.

We decided against this because encoding exceptions into rules would bloat project configs on the wire and in Relay.

### False Positives

> The discovery of replacement rules is a best-effort approach: No matter how many rules the clusterer discovers, a project can always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The discovery of replacement rules is a best-effort approach: no matter how many rules the clusterer discovers, a project can always
```

like `/settings` has type `url`, neither the pattern-based nor the rule-based approach detect any identifiers.

In order to prevent these false negatives, as of [this PR](https://github.com/getsentry/relay/pull/1960) we mark _every_ URL transaction as low-cardinality as long as there
is _some_ scrubbing rule (even if it does not match), or we found an identifier pattern. In other words, we sacrifice [precision](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall) for the sake of [recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall).

| category       | description                                                                          |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| true positive  | We scrubbed all identifiers (if any) and label the transaction as `sanitized`        |
| false positive | We miss an identifier, but still label as `sanitized`                                |
| true negative  | We keep the transaction labeled as `url` and it contains identifiers                 |

> | false negative | We keep the transaction labeled as `url` even though it does not contain identifiers |

Author: Not sure whether this table is helpful or confusing.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if it helps, I'd probably remove it but your call. If you decide to leave it, I'd do it in a 2x2 contingency table, like [this one](https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.researchgate.net%2Ffigure%2FContingency-table-True-Positive-False-Positive-False-Negative-and-True-Negatives-are_fig5_280535795&psig=AOvVaw0DG6Iea5wQZxUOvnvRC5Mp&ust=1680340859920000&source=images&cd=vfe&ved=0CA8QjRxqFwoTCMjB6NHrhf4CFQAAAAAdAAAAABAE).

Author: Talked to @jan-auer and decided to keep it  as-is.

---
title: Clustering URL Transactions
---

Sentry attempts to scrub high-cardinality identifiers from URL transactions
to give the user more meaningful transaction groups.

In terms of user experience, this feature plays a similar role as [Issue Grouping](/grouping/).
In terms of technical implementation, it is similar to [Data Scrubbing](/pii/).

## The Problem

In our [Performance](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/) product, transactions are grouped by their name
(the [`event.transaction`](/sdk/event-payloads/#optional-attributes) field).
This works well as long as the cardinality of distinct transaction names that the SDK sends is low, for example
by using the [route of a web framework](https://docs.sentry.io/platforms/javascript/guides/react/configuration/integrations/react-router/) as transaction name.

> However, in some cases the SDK does not have enough information to pick a meaningful group

Author: ```suggestion
In some cases, however, the SDK does not have enough information to pick a meaningful group
```

In some cases, however, the SDK does not have enough information to pick a meaningful group
like the name of a view or a route of a web transaction,
and it falls back to the raw URL (or rather,
[its path component](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier#Syntax)).

This makes it harder for the user to extract insights from [Performance
metrics](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/metrics/), because instead of presenting averages, percentiles and distributions of groups of transactions that logically
belong together, we end up with a bunch of one-off transaction groups.

```URLs
/user/alice/
/user/bob/
/blog/1234567890/comments/
/hash/4c79f60c11214eb38604f4ae0781bfb2/diff/
```

### << unparameterized >>

Secondly, ingesting a high number of one-off transaction names also does not scale to the required volume,
because with [metrics](https://getsentry.github.io/relay/relay_metrics/index.html), scalability is determined by _cardinality_ (the number of distinct groups), not volume (the number of events ingested).

> An intermediate solution to the scale problem was to drop the transaction tag from Performance metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An intermediate solution to the scale problem was to drop the transaction tag from performance metrics
```
